Perspective: Is Security Getting Worse or Better?
*************************************************

Security breaches are now a standard risk of connecting any system to
the Internet, and it is rare for a week to go by without news of some
new attack. Verizon, a large telco, conducts an annual review of the
state of cyber-attacks; in 2024 they reached a milestone with over
10,000 incidents, such as ransomware and phishing attacks, covered in
the report. Measured by number of attacks then, it seems that things
are getting worse. By contrast, an analysis of the economic impact of
cyber-attacks performed by *The Economist* argued that the peak days
of cyber-attacks might be behind us. The worst era for attacks in
their economic analysis was 2003–2004 by a large margin.

There are certainly some respects in which security is improving. This
can be attributed both to greater awareness of the need for strong
security whenever important information is being handled, and the
development of new techniques that enable better security practices.

One example of a technology development that improved security
implementations is SDN (software-defined networking). SDN has enabled
a relatively new approach to providing isolation among systems known
as *microsegmentation*.

Microsegmentation stands in contrast to traditional approaches to
segmenting networks, in which large sets of machines connect to a
“zone” and firewalls are used to filter traffic passing between zones.
While this makes for relatively simple network configuration, it means
that lots of machines are in the same zone even if there was no need
for them to communicate. Furthermore, the complexity of firewall rules
grows over time as more and more rules need to be added to describe
the traffic allowed to pass from one zone to another.

By contrast, SDN allows for the creation of precisely defined virtual
networks—microsegments—that determine both which machines can
communicate with each other and how they can do so. For example, a
three-tier application can have its own microsegmentation policy which
states:  machines in the web-facing tier of the application can talk
to the machines in the application tier on some set of specified
ports, but web-facing machines may not talk to each other. This is a
policy that was difficult to implement in the past;instead all the
web-facing machines would sit on the same network segment, free to
communicate with each other.

The complexity of configuring segments was the reason that machines
from many applications would likely sit on the same segment, creating
opportunities for an attack to spread from one application to another.
The lateral movement of attacks within datacenters has been well
documented as a key strategy of successful cyberattacks over many
years.

Consider the arrangement of VMs and the firewall in Figure %s. Suppose
that we wanted to put VM A and VM B in different segments and apply a
firewall rule for traffic going from VM A to VM B. We have to prevent
VM A from sending traffic directly to VM B. To do this, we could
configure two VLANs in the physical network, connect A to one of them,
and B to the other, and then configure the routing such that the path
from the first VLAN to the second passes through the firewall. If at
some point VM A was moved to another server, we’d then have to make
sure the appropriate VLAN reached *that* server, connect VM A to it,
and ensure that the routing configuration still forces traffic through
the firewall. This situation may seem a little contrived, but it
demonstrates why microsegmentation was challenging to implement before
the arrival of SDN. By contrast, SDN allows the firewall function to
be implemented in each virtual switch (vS in the figure). Thus,
traffic from VM A to VM B passes through the firewall without any
special routing configuration. It is the job of the SDN controller to
create the appropriate firewall rule to enforce the desired isolation
between VM A and VM B (and deal with movements of VM A and VM B if
they occur). There is no magic, but SDN gives us a new tool to make a
finer degree of isolation much easier to manage.

   [image]A set of virtual machines communicate through a firewall

The development of microsegmentation over the last decade was one of
the major drivers of SDN adoption in the enterprise. It became the
basis for a best practice in security known as “zero-trust”
networking. Zero trust means that, as much as possible, every system
in the network is assumed to be untrusted, and hence should be
isolated from all other systems aside from precisely those systems it
needs access to in order to do its assigned job.

The importance of the Internet in the running of critical systems and
as the underpinning for much of the world's commerce has made it an
attractive target for hackers. At the same time it drives home the
need to develop and adopt best practices such as zero-trust
networking. When we read of breaches today, it is often the case that
some best practice has not been followed. The Verizon cybersecurity
report, by documenting what has gone wrong in thousands of attacks,
provides useful information about how many of those attacks could be
prevented through using established cyber-hygiene techniques.

Broader Perspective: Verizon's data breach report can be obtained from
Data Breach Investigations Report.The economic impact of cyber-attacks
is analyzed by *The Economist* in this article: Unexpectedly, the cost
of big cyber-attacks is falling, May 2024.A deeper discussion on the
use of SDN techniques to improve security is provided in Chapter 8 of
our book Software-Defined Networking: A Systems Approach.
